Welcome to Regression Metrics and Evaluation Techniques.
After watching this video, you will be able to explain the need to evaluate regression
models, define the error of a model, and describe certain regression metrics and evaluation
techniques.
You will also be able to compare different regression metrics.
Did you know that regression models are not foolproof?
They often make prediction errors.
Evaluating a regression model involves determining how accurately the model can predict continuous
numerical values, such as exam grades.
Consider a scenario where you want to predict your grades for your final exam after receiving
your midterm scores.
You have fit your regression line.
The blue dots are the grades you've received.
The differences between the line and the blue dots are called errors.
The predicted values minus the actual values.
In the context of linear regression, the error of the model is a measure of the difference
between the data points and the trend line generated by the algorithm.
Since there are multiple data points, an error can be determined in various ways.
Regression metrics provide insight into a model's performance, such as its accuracy,
error distribution, and error magnitude.
There are four metrics that are most important in regression.
MAE, or Mean Absolute Error, is the average absolute difference between the values fitted
by the model and the observed historical data.
MSE, or Mean Squared Error, is the sum of the squared difference between the values
fitted by the model and observed values divided by the number of historical points minus the
number of parameters in the model.
RMSE, or Root Mean Squared Error, is the square root of the MSE.
This is a popular evaluation metric because it has the same units as the target variable,
making it easier to interpret than MSE.
R-squared is the amount of variance in the dependent variable that the independent variable
can explain.
It is also called the coefficient of determination and measures the model's goodness of fit.
The values range from 0 to 1, with 0 being a badly fit model and 1 being a perfect model.
Values between 0 and 1 are what you can expect from real-world scenarios as there is no perfect
model in real life.
Consider these evaluation metrics, which compare a model's predicted values, y i-hat, with
the actual values, y-l.
No single evaluation metric can give you a universally good measure of goodness of fit.
You need to visualize your results.
Plot the actual and predicted values for your model to see how well your regression model
fits the labels.
Explained variance is the sum of squared differences between the predictions and the average value
of the actual target data.
For a perfect predictor, explained variance is the same as the total variance of the target,
where total variance, usually denoted as sigma squared, measures the total variable
of the target values from their mean value.
R squared is a popular evaluation metric that measures the proportion of variance in the
target variable that is predictable from the input variables.
R squared is a simple measure for describing model performance, claiming that the model
explains 85% of the variation in the outcome is readily understood by non-technical people.
It is important to remember that R squared assumes the target is linearly related to
the input features.
It can be misleading for nonlinear models.
If the model perfectly predicts all data points, in that case, y i-hat equals y i for all i,
the explained variance is identical to the total variance, and the unexplained variance
is zero.
Thus, R squared is one for a perfect model.
Suppose the model's predictions are extremely simplistic, constantly predicting the mean
of the data for every data point.
In that case, it doesn't explain any variance, because the explained variance is zero, and
the total variance is then precisely the unexplained variance.
Thus, the R squared is zero for the simplistic mean-value model.
Negative R squared values mean the model performs so poorly that unexplained variance exceeds
total variance.
Three linear regression results are shown here based on a simulated target variable
with an exponential distribution, commonly known as log-normal distribution.
The linear model fits three versions of the target variable, the original target, a Box-Cox
transformed version of the target, and a logarithmically transformed version.
Visually, you can see that the models progressively fit the target data better, and better because
the data becomes more concentrated around the best-fit line with each transformation.
The various evaluation metrics displayed for each of the three models fit to the transformed
targets are all consistent with our visual intuition of the result.
R squared increased significantly for Box-Cox and log transformations, and the error metrics
MAE, MSE, and RMSE all improved substantially.
In this video, you learned that evaluating a regression model involves determining how
accurately the model can predict continuous numerical values.
The error of the model is a measure of the difference between the data points and the
trend line generated by the algorithm.
The essential regression metrics are MAE, MSE, RMSE, and R squared.
Explained variance is the sum of squared differences between the predictions and the average value
of the actual target data.
R squared measures the proportion of variance in the target variable that is predictable
from the input variables.